MLB 2025 Official Baseball Rules — Extracted 'Comment' (Casebook-style) Blocks
Source PDF: https://mktg.mlbstatic.com/mlb/official-information/2025-official-baseball-rules.pdf



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RULE: 5.02(c)
COMMENT:
Should a ball come partially apart in a
game, it is in play until the play is completed.

RULE: 3.02
COMMENT:
If pine tar extends past the 18-inch
limitation, then the umpire, on his own initiative or if alerted
by the opposing team, shall order the batter to use a different
bat. The batter may use the bat later in the game only if the
excess substance is removed. If no objections are raised prior
to a bat’s use, then a violation of Rule 3.02(c) on that play does
not nullify any action or play on the field.
(d) No colored bat may be used in a professional game unless

RULE: 3.03
COMMENT:
If the umpire observes any violation of
these rules, he shall direct the violation to be corrected. If
the violation is not corrected within a reasonable time, in the
umpire’s judgment, the umpire shall eject the offender from
the game, and disciplinary action, as appropriate, will be

RULE: 3.09
COMMENT:
The umpire shall not give an alternate
ball to the pitcher until play has ended and the previously used
ball is dead. After a thrown or batted ball goes out of the playing
field, play shall not be resumed with an alternate ball until the
runners have reached the bases to which they are entitled. After
a home run is hit out of the playing grounds, the umpire shall
not deliver a new ball to the pitcher or the catcher until the
batter hitting the home run has crossed the plate.

RULE: 4.03(c)
COMMENT:
Obvious errors in the batting order, which
are noticed by the umpire-in-chief before he calls “Play” for
the start of the game, should be called to the attention of the
manager or captain of the team in error, so the correction can
be made before the game starts. For example, if a manager
has inadvertently listed only eight men in the batting order, or
has listed two players with the same last name but without an
identifying initial and the errors are noticed by the umpire before
he calls “play,” he shall cause such error or errors to be corrected
before he calls “play” to start the game. Teams should not be
“trapped” later by some mistake that obviously was inadvertent
and which can be corrected before the game starts.
The umpire-in-chief shall at all times try to complete a game.
His authority to resume play following one or more suspensions
of as much as 30 minutes each shall be absolute and he shall
terminate a game only when there appears to be no possibility
of completing it.
The Major Leagues have determined that Rule 4.03(e) does not
apply to any Wild Card, Division Series, League Championship
Series or World Series games or for any additional Major
League championship season game played to break a tie.

RULE: 4.04
COMMENT:
(2) If two games are scheduled to be played for one admission
on one date, the first game shall be the regularly scheduled
game for that date.
(b) After the start of the first game of a conventional or split
doubleheader, that game shall be completed before the second
game of the doubleheader shall begin.
(c) The second game of a doubleheader shall start thirty minutes
after the first game is completed, unless a longer interval (not

RULE: 4.08(g)
COMMENT:
Umpires should bear in mind that the
purpose of the Infielder Positioning rule is to prevent the defense
from having more than two infielders on either side of second
base in an effort to anticipate where the batter will hit the ball
prior to delivery of the pitch. If, in the judgment of the umpire,
any fielder attempts to circumvent the purposes of this Rule

RULE: 5.02(c)
COMMENT:
If a penalty of Rule 5.02(c) is
called with a play in progress the umpire will allow the play to
continue because the manager may elect to take the play. If the
batter-runner missed first base, or a runner misses his next base,
he shall be considered as having reached the base, as stated in

RULE: 5.03
COMMENT:
The batter leaves the batter’s box
at the risk of having a strike delivered and called, unless he
requests the umpire to call “Time.” The batter is not at liberty
to step in and out of the batter’s box at will.
Once a batter has taken his position in the batter’s box, he shall
not be permitted to step out of the batter’s box in order to use
the rosin or the pine tar rag, unless there is a delay in the game
action or, in the judgment of the umpires, weather conditions
warrant an exception.
Umpires will not call “Time” at the request of the batter or any
member of his team once the pitcher has started his windup or

RULE: 5.04(b)(3)
COMMENT:
The umpire shall give the batter
a reasonable opportunity to take his proper position in the
batter’s box after the umpire has called a strike pursuant to Rule

RULE: 5.04(b)(4)
COMMENT:
Umpires shall encourage the on-
deck batter to take a position in the batter’s box quickly after
the previous batter reaches base or is put out.
(5) The batter’s legal position shall be with both feet within
the batter’s box.
APPROVED RULING: The lines defining the box are within
the batter’s box.
(c) Completing Time at Bat
A batter has legally completed his time at bat when he is put out

RULE: 5.05
COMMENT:
If the batter hits a pitch that touches the
ground first, the ensuing action shall be the same as if he hit the
ball in flight.
(2) The third strike called by the umpire is not caught,
providing (1) first base is unoccupied, or (2) first base is

RULE: 5.05(a)(2)
COMMENT:
A batter who does not realize his
situation on a third strike not caught, and who is not in the
process of running to first base, shall be declared out once he
leaves the dirt circle surrounding home plate.

RULE: 5.05(a)(9)
COMMENT:
A batter who is entitled to first base
because of a base on balls, including an award of first base to
a batter by an umpire following a signal from a manager, must
go to first base and touch the base before other base runners are
forced to advance. This applies when bases are full and applies
when a substitute runner is put into the game.
If, in advancing, the base runner thinks there is a play and he
slides past the base before or after touching it he may be put out
by the fielder tagging him. If he fails to touch the base to which
he is entitled and attempts to advance beyond that base he may
be put out by tagging him or the base he missed.
(2) He is touched by a pitched ball which he is not attempting
to hit unless (A) The ball is in the strike zone when it
touches the batter, or (B) The batter makes no attempt to
avoid being touched by the ball;
If the ball is in the strike zone when it touches the batter, it shall be
called a strike, whether or not the batter tries to avoid the ball. If the
ball is outside the strike zone when it touches the batter, it shall be
called a ball if he makes no attempt to avoid being touched.
APPROVED RULING: When the batter is touched by a
pitched ball which does not entitle him to first base, the ball

RULE: 5.05(b)(2)
COMMENT:
A batter shall not be considered
touched by a pitched ball if the ball only touches any jewelry
being worn by a player (e.g., necklaces, bracelets, etc.).
(3) T he catcher or any fielder interferes with him. If a play
follows the interference, the manager of the offense
may advise the plate umpire that he elects to decline the
interference penalty and accept the play. Such election shall
be made immediately at the end of the play. However, if the

RULE: 5.05(b)(4)
COMMENT:
If catcher’s interference is called
with a play in progress the umpire will allow the play to
continue because the manager may elect to take the play. If the
batter-runner missed first base, or a runner misses his next base,
he shall be considered as having reached the base, as stated in

RULE: 5.06(b)(3)(D)
COMMENT:
If a runner legally acquires title
to a base, and the pitcher assumes his pitching position, the
runner may not return to a previously occupied base.
(2) Two runners may not occupy a base, but if, while the ball
is alive, two runners are touching a base, the following
runner shall be out when tagged and the preceding runner

RULE: 5.06(b)(2)
COMMENT:
A runner forced to advance
without liability to be put out may advance past the base to
which he is entitled only at his peril. If such a runner, forced to
advance, is put out for the third out before a preceding runner,
also forced to advance, touches home plate, the run shall score.
Play. Two out, bases full, batter walks but runner from second
is overzealous and runs past third base toward home and is
tagged out on a throw by the catcher. Even though two are out,
the run would score on the theory that the run was forced home
by the base on balls and that all the runners needed to do was
proceed and touch the next base.
(C) A fielder, after catching a fly ball, steps or falls into

RULE: 5.06(b)(3)(C)
COMMENT:
If a fielder, after having made
a legal catch, should step or fall into any out-of-play area, the
ball is dead and each runner shall advance one base, without
liability to be put out, from his last legally touched base at the
time the fielder entered such out-of-play area.
(D) W hile he is attempting to steal a base, the batter is
interfered with by the catcher or any other fielder.
NOTE: When a runner is entitled to a base without liability
to be put out, while the ball is in play, or under any rule in
which the ball is in play after the runner reaches the base to
which he is entitled, and the runner fails to touch the base to
which he is entitled before attempting to advance to the next
base, the runner shall forfeit his exemption from liability to
be put out, and he may be put out by tagging the base or by
tagging the runner before he returns to the missed base;
(E) A fielder deliberately touches a pitched ball with his
cap, mask or any part of his uniform detached from its
proper place on his person. The ball is in play, and the
award is made from the position of the runner at the
time the ball was touched.
(4) Each runner including the batter-runner may, without
liability to be put out, advance:

RULE: 5.06(b)(4)
COMMENT:
In applying (B-C-
D-E) the umpire must rule that the thrown glove or detached
cap or mask has touched the ball. There is no penalty if the ball
is not touched.
Under (C-E) this penalty shall not be invoked against a fielder
whose glove is carried off his hand by the force of a batted or
thrown ball, or when his glove flies off his hand as he makes an
obvious effort to make a legitimate catch.
(F) T wo bases, if a fair ball bounces or is deflected into
the stands outside the first or third base foul lines; or
if it goes through or under a field fence, or through
or under a scoreboard, or through or under shrubbery
or vines on the fence; or if it sticks in such fence,
scoreboard, shrubbery or vines;
(G) Two bases when, with no spectators on the playing
field, a thrown ball goes into the stands, or into a

RULE: 5.06(b)(4)
COMMENT:
In certain circumstances it is
impossible to award a runner two bases. Example: Runner on
first. Batter hits fly to short right. Runner holds up between first
and second and batter comes around first and pulls up behind
him. Ball falls safely. Outfielder, in throwing to first, throws
ball into stands.
APPROVED RULING: Since no runner, when the ball is dead,
may advance beyond the base to which he is entitled, the runner
originally on first base goes to third base and the batter is held
at second base.
The term “when the wild throw was made” means when the
throw actually left the player’s hand and not when the thrown
ball hit the ground, passes a receiving fielder or goes out of play
into the stands.
The position of the batter-runner at the time the wild throw left
the thrower’s hand is the key in deciding the award of bases.
If the batter-runner has not reached first base, the award is
two bases at the time the pitch was made for all runners. The
decision as to whether the batter-runner has reached first base
before the throw is a judgment call.

RULE: 5.06(b)(4)
COMMENT:
The fact a runner is awarded a
base or bases without liability to be put out does not relieve
him of the responsibility to touch the base he is awarded and all
intervening bases. For example: Batter hits a ground ball which
an infielder throws into the stands but the batter-runner missed
first base. He may be called out on appeal for missing first
base after the ball is put in play even though he was “awarded”
second base.
If a runner is forced to return to a base after a catch, he must
retouch his original base even though, because of some ground
rule or other rule, he is awarded additional bases. He may
retouch while the ball is dead and the award is then made from
his original base.
(c) Dead Balls
The ball becomes dead and runners advance one base, or return to
their bases, without liability to be put out, when:
(1) A pitched ball touches a batter, or his clothing, while in his
legal batting position; runners, if forced, advance;
(2) The plate umpire interferes with the catcher’s throw
attempting to prevent a stolen base or retire a runner on a
pick-off play; runners may not advance.
NOTE: The interference shall be disregarded if the catcher’s
throw retires the runner.
While the ball is dead no player may be put out, no bases may be run
and no runs may be scored, except that runners may advance one or
more bases as the result of acts which occurred while the ball was
alive (such as, but not limited to a balk, an overthrow, interference,
or a home run or other fair ball hit out of the playing field).

RULE: 5.06(c)(2)
COMMENT:
Umpire interference may also occur
when an umpire interferes with a catcher returning the ball to

RULE: 5.06(c)(3)
COMMENT:
If a fair ball touches an umpire
working in the infield after it has bounded past, or over, the
pitcher, it is a dead ball. If a batted ball is deflected by a fielder
in fair territory and hits a runner or an umpire while still in
flight and then caught by an infielder it shall not be a catch, but
the ball shall remain in play.
(7) A pitched ball lodges in the catcher’s mask or parapherna-
lia, or in or against the umpire’s body, mask or parapher-
nalia, and remains out of play, runners advance one base;

RULE: 5.06(c)(7)
COMMENT:
If a foul tip hits the umpire and is
caught by a fielder on the rebound, the ball is “dead” and the
batsman cannot be called out. The same shall apply where such
foul tip lodges in the umpire’s mask or other paraphernalia.
If a third strike (not a foul tip) passes the catcher and hits
an umpire, the ball is in play. If such ball rebounds and is
caught by a fielder before it touches the ground, the batsman
is not out on such a catch, but the ball remains in play and the

RULE: 5.07(a)
COMMENT:
Pitchers may disengage the rubber after
taking their signs but may not step quickly onto the rubber and
pitch. This may be judged a quick pitch by the umpire. When
the pitcher disengages the rubber, he must drop his hands to his
sides.
Pitchers will not be allowed to disengage the rubber after taking
each sign.
The pitcher may not take a second step toward home plate with
either foot or otherwise reset his pivot foot in his delivery of the
pitch. If there is a runner, or runners, on base it is a balk under

RULE: 6.02(a)
COMMENT:
In the Windup Position, a pitcher is
permitted to have his “free” foot on the rubber, in front of the
rubber, behind the rubber or off the side of the rubber.
From the Windup Position, the pitcher may:
(A) deliver the ball to the batter, or
(B) step and throw to a base in an attempt to pick-off a
runner, or
(C) disengage the rubber (if he does he must drop his hand
to his sides).
In disengaging the rubber the pitcher must step off with his
pivot foot and not his free foot first. He may not go into a set or
stretch position—if he does it is a balk.
(2) The Set Position
Set Position shall be indicated by the pitcher when he stands
facing the batter with his pivot foot in contact with, and his other
foot in front of, the pitcher’s plate, holding the ball in both hands
in front of his body and coming to a complete stop. From such Set
Position he may deliver the ball to the batter, throw to a base or
step backward off the pitcher’s plate with his pivot foot. Before
assuming Set Position, the pitcher may elect to make any natural
preliminary motion such as that known as “the stretch.” But if he
so elects, he shall come to Set Position before delivering the ball

RULE: 5.07(b)
COMMENT:
With no runners on base, the pitcher
is not required to come to a complete stop when using the
Set Position. If, however, in the umpire’s judgment, a pitcher
delivers the ball in a deliberate effort to catch the batter off
guard, this delivery shall be deemed a quick pitch, for which the

RULE: 6.02(a)(5)
COMMENT:
With a runner or runners on base, a pitcher will be presumed to
be pitching from the Set Position if he stands with his pivot foot
in contact with and parallel to the pitcher’s plate, and his other
foot in front of the pitcher’s plate, unless he notifies the umpire
that he will be pitching from the Windup Position under such
circumstances prior to the beginning of an at-bat. A pitcher
will be permitted to notify the umpire that he is pitching from
the Windup Position within an at-bat only in the event of (i) a
substitution by the offensive team; or (ii) immediately upon the
advancement of one or more runners (i.e., after one or more
base runners advance but before the delivery of the next pitch).
(b) Warm-Up Pitches
When a pitcher takes his position at the beginning of each inning,
or when he relieves another pitcher, he shall be permitted to
pitch preparatory pitches to his catcher during which play shall

RULE: 5.07(e)
COMMENT:
The pitcher shall step “ahead of the
throw.” A snap throw followed by the step directly toward the
base is a balk.
(e) Effect of Removing Pivot Foot From Plate
If the pitcher removes his pivot foot from contact with the
pitcher’s plate by stepping backward with that foot, he thereby
becomes an infielder and if he makes a wild throw from that
position, it shall be considered the same as a wild throw by any
other infielder.

RULE: 5.08(b)
COMMENT:
The pitcher, while off the rubber, may
throw to any base. If he makes a wild throw, such throw is the
throw of an infielder and what follows is governed by the rules
covering a ball thrown by a fielder.
(f) Ambidextrous Pitchers
A pitcher must indicate visually to the umpire-in-chief, the batter
and any runners the hand with which he intends to pitch, which
may be done by wearing his glove on the other hand while touching
the pitcher’s plate. The pitcher is not permitted to pitch with the
other hand until the batter is retired, the batter becomes a runner,
the inning ends, the batter is substituted for by a pinch-hitter or the
pitcher incurs an injury. In the event a pitcher switches pitching
hands during an at-bat because he has suffered an injury, the
pitcher may not, for the remainder of the game, pitch with the
hand from which he has switched. The pitcher shall not be given
the opportunity to throw any preparatory pitches after switching
pitching hands. Any change of pitching hands must be indicated

RULE: 5.08
COMMENT:
A run legally scored cannot be nullified
by subsequent action of the runner, such as but not limited to
an effort to return to third base in the belief that he had left the
base before a caught fly ball.
(b) W hen the winning run is scored in the last half-inning of a
regulation game, or in the last half of an extra inning, as the result
of a base on balls, hit batter or any other play with the bases full

RULE: 5.08(b)
COMMENT:
An exception will be if fans rush onto
the field and physically prevent the runner from touching home
plate or the batter from touching first base. In such cases,
the umpires shall award the runner the base because of the
obstruction by the fans.
PENALTY: If the runner on third refuses to advance to and
touch home base in a reasonable time, the umpire shall
disallow the run, call out the offending player and order the
game resumed. If, with two out, the batter-runner refuses to
advance to and touch first base, the umpire shall disallow
the run, call out the offending player, and order the game
resumed. If, before two are out, the batter-runner refuses to
advance to and touch first base, the run shall count, but the
offending player shall be called out.

RULE: 5.08
COMMENT:
APPROVED RULING: No run shall score during a play in
which the third out is made by the batter-runner before he
touches first base. Example: One out, Jones on second, Smith
on first. The batter, Brown, hits safely. Jones scores. Smith is
out on the throw to the plate. Two outs. But Brown missed
first base. The ball is thrown to first, an appeal is made, and
Brown is out. Three outs. Since Jones crossed the plate during
a play in which the third out was made by the batter-runner
before he touched first base, Jones’ run does not count.
APPROVED RULING: Following runners are not affected
by an act of a preceding runner unless two are out.
EXAMPLE: One out, Jones on second, Smith on first, and
batter, Brown, hits home run inside the park. Jones fails to
touch third on his way to the plate. Smith and Brown score.
The defense holds the ball on third, appeals to umpire, and
Jones is out. Smith’s and Brown’s runs count.

RULE: 5.09(a)(1)
COMMENT:
A fielder may reach into, but not step
into, a dugout to make a catch, and if he holds the ball, the
catch shall be allowed. A fielder, in order to make a catch on
a foul ball nearing a dugout or other out-of-play area (such as
the stands), must have one or both feet on or over the playing
surface (including the lip of the dugout) and neither foot on the
ground inside the dugout or in any other out-of-play area. Ball
is in play, unless the fielder, after making a legal catch, steps
or falls into a dugout or other out-of-play area, in which case
the ball is dead. Status of runners shall be as described in Rule

RULE: 5.06(b)(3)(C)
COMMENT:
A catch is the act of a fielder in getting secure possession in his hand
or glove of a ball in flight and firmly holding it; providing he does
not use his cap, protector, pocket or any other part of his uniform
in getting possession. It is not a catch, however, if simultaneously
or immediately following his contact with the ball, he collides with
a player, or with a wall, or if he falls down, and as a result of such
collision or falling, drops the ball. It is not a catch if a fielder touches
a fly ball which then hits a member of the offensive team or an umpire
and then is caught by another defensive player. In establishing the
validity of the catch, the fielder shall hold the ball long enough to
prove that he has complete control of the ball and that his release of
the ball is voluntary and intentional. If the fielder has made the catch
and drops the ball while in the act of making a throw following the
catch, the ball shall be adjudged to have been caught.
Catch Comment: A catch is legal if the ball is finally held by
any fielder, even though juggled, or held by another fielder
before it touches the ground. Runners may leave their bases
the instant the first fielder touches the ball. A fielder may reach
over a fence, railing, rope or other line of demarcation to make
a catch. He may jump on top of a railing, or canvas that may
be in foul ground. No interference should be allowed when a
fielder reaches over a fence, railing, rope or into a stand to catch
a ball. He does so at his own risk.
If a fielder, attempting a catch at the edge of the dugout, is “held
up” and kept from an apparent fall by a player or players of
either team and the catch is made, it shall be allowed.

RULE: 5.09(a)(8)
COMMENT:
“Legally caught” means in the
catcher’s glove before the ball touches the ground. It is not
legal if the ball lodges in his clothing or paraphernalia; or if it
touches the umpire and is caught by the catcher on the rebound.
If a foul tip first strikes any part of the catcher’s body or
paraphernalia and is caught by hand or glove against his body
or protector, before the ball touches the ground, it is a strike,
and if third strike, batter is out.
(3) A third strike is not caught by the catcher when first base
is occupied before two are out;
(4) He bunts foul on third strike;
(5) An Infield Fly is declared;
(6) He attempts to hit a third strike and the ball touches him;
(7) H is fair ball touches him before touching a fielder. If the
batter is in a legal position in the batter’s box, see Rule

RULE: 5.04(b)(5)
COMMENT:
If a bat breaks and part of it is in fair
territory and is hit by a batted ball or part of it hits a runner or
fielder, play shall continue and no interference called. If a batted
ball hits part of a broken bat in foul territory, it is a foul ball.

RULE: 5.09(a)(11)
COMMENT:
The chalk lines marking the three-
foot lane are a part of that lane and a batter-runner is required to
have both feet within the three-foot lane, on the lines marking
the lane, or on the dirt inside (to the left of) the foul line in
running the last half of the distance from home base to first base.

RULE: 5.09(a)(15)
COMMENT:
The objective of this rule is to
penalize the offensive team for deliberate, unwarranted, un-
sportsmanlike action by the runner in leaving the baseline for
the obvious purpose of crashing the pivot man on a double
play, rather than trying to reach the base. Obviously this is an

RULE: 6.01(j)
COMMENT:
Any runner after reaching
first base who leaves the base path heading for his dugout
or his position believing that there is no further play, may
be declared out if the umpire judges the act of the runner to
be considered abandoning his efforts to run the bases. Even
though an out is called, the ball remains in play in regard to
any other runner.
This rule also covers the following and similar plays: Less than
two out, score tied last of ninth inning, runner on first, batter
hits a ball out of park for winning run, the runner on first passes
second and thinking the home run automatically wins the game,
cuts across diamond toward his bench as batter-runner circles
bases. In this case, the base runner would be called out “for
abandoning his effort to touch the next base” and batter-runner
permitted to continue around bases to make his home run
valid. If there are two out, home run would not count. See Rule

RULE: 5.09(d)
COMMENT:
Runners need not “tag up” on a foul
tip. They may steal on a foul tip. If a so-called tip is not caught,
it becomes an ordinary foul. Runners then return to their bases.
(6) He or the next base is tagged before he touches the next
base, after he has been forced to advance by reason of
the batter becoming a runner. However, if a following
runner is put out on a force play, the force is removed
and the runner must be tagged to be put out. The force
is re moved as soon as the runner touches the base to
which he is forced to advance, and if he overslides or
overruns the base, the runner must be tagged to be put
out. However, if the forced runner, after touching the
next base, retreats for any reason towards the base he
had last occupied, the force play is reinstated, and he can

RULE: 5.09(b)(7)
COMMENT:
PLAY—Runner on first and three balls on batter: Runner
steals on the next pitch, which is fourth ball, but after
having touched second he overslides or overruns that base.
Catcher’s throw catches him before he can return. Ruling is
that runner is out. (Force out is removed.)
Oversliding and overrunning situations arise at bases other
than first base. For instance, before two are out, and runners
on first and second, or first, second and third, the ball is hit
to an infielder who tries for the double play. The runner
on first beats the throw to second base but over-slides the
base. The relay is made to first base and the batter-runner is
out. The first baseman, seeing the runner at second base off
the bag, makes the return throw to second and the runner
is tagged off the base. Meanwhile runners have crossed the
plate. The question is: Is this a force play? Was the force
removed when the batter-runner was out at first base? Do
the runs that crossed the plate during this play and before
the third out was made when the runner was tagged at
second, count? Answer: The runs score. It is not a force
play. It is a tag play.
(7) He is touched by a fair ball in fair territory before the ball
has gone through, or by, an infielder and no other infi elder
has a chance to make a play on the ball. The ball is dead
and no runner may score, nor runners advance, except
runners forced to advance. EXCEPTION: If a runner is
touching his base when touched by an Infield Fly, he is not

RULE: 5.09(b)(7)
COMMENT:
If two runners are touched by the
same fair ball, only the first one is out because the ball is
instantly dead.
If a runner is touched by an Infield Fly when he is not
touching his base, and before the ball has gone through,

RULE: 5.09(b)(10)
COMMENT:
A runner may be deemed to have
passed a preceding (i.e., lead) runner based on his actions or the
actions of a preceding runner.
PLAY—Runners on second base and third base with one out.
The runner from third base (i.e., the lead runner) makes an
advance toward home and is caught in a rundown between
third base and home plate. Believing the lead runner will be
tagged out, the runner at second base (i.e., the trailing runner)
advances to third base. Before being tagged, the lead runner
runs back to and beyond third base toward left field. At this
time, the trailing runner has passed the lead runner as a result
of the lead runner’s actions. As a result, the trailing runner is
out and third base is unoccupied. The lead runner is entitled
to third base if he returns to touch it before he is out, see Rule

RULE: 5.06(a)(1)
COMMENT:
If a runner touches an unoccupied
base and then thinks the ball was caught or is decoyed into
returning to the base he last touched, he may be put out running

RULE: 5.09(c)(1)
COMMENT:
Runner who touches first base in
overrunning and is declared safe by the umpire has, within

RULE: 5.08(a)
COMMENT:
This rule applies only where runner
is on his way to the bench and the catcher would be required to
chase him. It does not apply to the ordinary play where the runner
misses the plate and then immediately makes an effort to touch
the plate before being tagged. In that case, runner must be tagged.
(13) A play on him is being made and a member of his team
(other than a runner) hinders a fielder’s attempt to field

RULE: 5.09(b)(3)
COMMENT:
“Retouch,” in this rule, means to
tag up and start from a contact with the base after the ball is

RULE: 5.09(c)(4)
COMMENT:
PLAY—(A) Batter hits ball out of park or ground rule double
and misses first base (ball is dead)—he may return to first
base to correct his mistake before he touches second but if
he touches second he may not return to first and if defensive
team appeals he is declared out at first.
PLAY—(B) Batter hits ball to shortstop who throws
wild into stand (ball is dead)—batter-runner misses first
base but is awarded second base on the overthrow. Even
though the umpire has awarded the runner second base on
the overthrow, the runner must touch first base before he
proceeds to second base.
These are appeal plays.
(3) He overruns or overslides first base and fails to return to
the base immediately, and he or the base is tagged prior to
the runner returning to first base;
(4) He fails to touch home base and makes no attempt to
return to that base, and home base is tagged.
Any appeal under this rule must be made before the next pitch, or
any play or attempted play. If the violation occurs during a play
which ends a half-inning, the appeal must be made before the
defensive team leaves the field.
An appeal is not to be interpreted as a play or an attempted play.

RULE: 5.09(d)
COMMENT:
If two runners arrive at home base
about the same time and the first runner misses home plate but a
second runner legally touches the plate, the runner is tagged out
on his attempt to come back and touch the base or is called out,
on appeal, then he shall be considered as having been put out
before the second runner scored and being the third out. Second
runner’s run shall not count, as provided in Rule 5.09(d).
If a pitcher balks when making an appeal, such act shall be a
play. An appeal should be clearly intended as an appeal, either
by a verbal request by the player or an act that unmistakably
indicates an appeal to the umpire. A player, inadvertently
stepping on the base with a ball in his hand, would not constitute
an appeal. Time is not out when an appeal is being made.
(d) Effect of Preceding Runner’s Failure to Touch a Base
Unless two are out, the status of a following runner is not affected
by a preceding runner’s failure to touch or retouch a base. If, upon
appeal, the preceding runner is the third out, no runners following
him shall score. If such third out is the result of a force play, neither
preceding nor following runners shall score.

RULE: 5.10(b)
COMMENT:
To avoid any confusion, the manager
should give the name of the substitute, his position in the batting
order and his position on the field. When two or more substitute
players of the defensive team enter the game at the same time, the
manager shall, immediately before they take their positions as
fielders, designate to the umpire-in-chief such players’ positions
in the team’s batting order, and the umpire-in-chief shall so notify
the Official Scorer. If this information is not immediately given
to the umpire-in-chief, the umpire- in-chief shall have authority
to designate the substitutes’ places in the batting order.
If a double-switch is being made, the manager or coach shall first
notify the plate umpire. The umpire-in-chief must be informed of
the multiple substitutions and interchanged batting order before
the manager calls for a new pitcher (regardless of whether the
manager or coach announces the double-switch before crossing
the foul line). Signaling or motioning to the bullpen is to be
considered an official substitution for the new pitcher. It is not
permissible for the manager to go to the mound, call for a new
pitcher, and then inform the umpire of multiple substitutions with
the intention of interchanging the batting order.
Players for whom substitutions have been made may remain with
their team on the bench or may “warm-up” pitchers. If a manager
substitutes another player for himself, he may continue to direct
his team from the bench or the coach’s box. Umpires should not

RULE: 5.10(d)
COMMENT:
A pitcher may change to another
position only once during the same inning; e.g. the pitcher will
not be allowed to assume a position other than a pitcher more
than once in the same inning.
Any player other than a pitcher substituted for an injured player
shall be allowed five warm-up throws. (See Rule 5.07(b) for

RULE: 5.10(d)
COMMENT:
This rule is intended to eliminate the
practice of using so-called courtesy runners. No player in
the game shall be permitted to act as a courtesy runner for a
teammate. No player who has been in the game and has been
taken out for a substitute shall return as a courtesy runner. Any
player not in the lineup, if used as a runner, shall be considered
as a substitute player.
(f) The pitcher named in the batting order handed the umpire-in-

RULE: 4.02(b)
COMMENT:
To qualify as one of three consecutive
batters, the batter must complete his plate appearance, which
ends only when the batter is put out or becomes a runner. If
the offensive team is put out prior to any substitute pitcher
completing his first three consecutive batters, the pitcher
may be removed from the game between innings; but, if he
returns for the subsequent inning, he must complete pitching

RULE: 5.10(g)(1)
COMMENT:
A league may provide standards to
determine the pitcher that is subject to Rule 5.10(g)(2) in the
event there is no pitcher warming up on the field at the start
of an inning.
(h) If an improper substitution is made for the pitcher, the umpire
shall direct the proper pitcher to return to the game until the
provisions of this rule are fulfilled. If the improper pitcher is
permitted to pitch, any play that results is legal. The improper
pitcher becomes the proper pitcher as soon as he makes his
first pitch to the batter, or as soon as any runner is put out.

RULE: 5.10(h)
COMMENT:
If a manager attempts to remove a

RULE: 5.10(h)
COMMENT:
Players on the injured list are permitted
to participate in pre-game activity and sit on the bench during a
game but may not take part in any activity during the game such
as warming up a pitcher, bench-jockeying, etc. Injured players
are not allowed to enter the playing surface at any time or for
any purpose during the game.
(l) Visits to the Mound Requiring a Pitcher’s Removal From
the Game
A professional league shall adopt the following rule pertaining to
the visit of the manager or coach to the pitcher:
(1) This rule limits the number of trips a manager or coach
may make to any one pitcher in any one inning;
(2) A second trip to the same pitcher in the same inning will
cause this pitcher’s automatic removal from the game;
(3) The manager or coach is prohibited from making a second
visit to the mound while the same batter is at bat, but
(4) if a pinch-hitter is substituted for this batter, the manager
or coach may make a second visit to the mound, but must
remove the pitcher from the game.
A manager or coach is considered to have concluded his visit to the
mound when he leaves the 18-foot circle surrounding the pitcher’s

RULE: 5.10(l)
COMMENT:
If the manager or coach goes to the
catcher or infielder and that player then goes to the mound
or the pitcher comes to him at his position before there is an
intervening play (a pitch or other play) that will be the same as
the manager or coach going to the mound.
Any attempt to evade or circumvent this rule by the manager or
coach going to the catcher or an infielder and then that player

RULE: 5.10(m)(1)
COMMENT:
A correction of a failure to indicate a
Designated Hitter when 10 players are listed in a batting order
is an “obvious” error that may be corrected before a game starts.

RULE: 4.03
COMMENT:
(2) The Designated Hitter named in the starting lineup must
come to bat at least one time, unless the opposing Club
changes pitchers.
(3) It is not mandatory that a Club designate a hitter for the
pitcher, but failure to do so prior to the game precludes
the use of a Designated Hitter for that Club for that
game.
(4) Pinch-hitters for a Designated Hitter may be used. Any
substitute hitter for a Designated Hitter becomes the
Designated Hitter. A replaced Designated Hitter shall not
re-enter the game in any capacity.
(5) The Designated Hitter may be used on defense, continuing
to bat in the same position in the batting order, but the
pitcher must then bat in the place of the substituted
defensive player, unless more than one substitution is

RULE: 5.11(a)(11)
COMMENT:
If the pitched ball deflects off the
catcher or umpire and subsequently touches the batter-runner,
it is not considered interference unless, in the judgment of the
umpire, the batter-runner clearly hinders the catcher in his
attempt to field the ball.
(2) He intentionally deflects the course of a foul ball in any
manner;
(3) Before two are out and a runner on third base, the batter
hinders a fielder in making a play at home base; the runner
is out;
(4) Any member or members of the offensive team stand or
gather around any base to which a runner is advancing,
to confuse, hinder or add to the difficulty of the fielders.
Such runner shall be declared out for the interference of
his teammate or teammates;
(5) Any batter or runner who has just been put out, or any
runner who has just scored, hinders or impedes any
following play being made on a runner. Such runner shall
be declared out for the interference of his teammate (see

RULE: 6.01(a)
COMMENT:
If the batter or a runner continues to
advance or returns or attempts to return to his last legally touched
base after he has been put out, he shall not by that act alone be
considered as confusing, hindering or impeding the fielders.
(6) If, in the judgment of the umpire, a base runner willfully
and deliberately interferes with a batted ball or a fielder in
the act of fielding a batted ball with the obvious intent to
break up a double play, the ball is dead. The umpire shall
call the runner out for interference and also call out the
batter-runner because of the action of his teammate. In
no event may bases be run or runs scored because of such

RULE: 6.01(j)
COMMENT:
When a catcher and batter-runner
going to first base have contact when the catcher is fielding the
ball, there is generally no violation and nothing should be called.
“Obstruction” by a fielder attempting to field a ball should be
called only in very flagrant and violent cases because the rules
give him the right of way, but of course such “right of way” is
not a license to, for example, intentionally trip a runner even
though fielding the ball. If the catcher is fielding the ball and
any fielder, including the pitcher, obstructs a runner going to first
base, “obstruction” shall be called and the base runner awarded
first base.
(11) A fair ball touches him on fair territory before touching a
fielder. If a fair ball goes through, or by, an infielder, and
touches a runner immediately back of him, or touches
the runner after having been deflected by a fielder, the
umpire shall not declare the runner out for being touched
by a batted ball. In making such decision the umpire
must be convinced that the ball passed through, or by, the
fielder, and that no other infielder had the chance to make
a play on the ball. If, in the judgment of the umpire, the
runner deliberately and intentionally kicks such a batted
ball on which the infielder has missed a play, then the
runner shall be called out for interference.
PENALTY FOR INTERFERENCE:
The runner is out and the ball is dead.
If the umpire declares the batter, batter-runner, or a runner out for
interference, all other runners shall return to the last base that was

RULE: 6.01(a)
COMMENT:
A runner who
is adjudged to have hindered a fielder who is attempting to
make a play on a batted ball is out whether it was intentional
or not.
If, however, the runner has contact with a legally occupied base
when he hinders the fielder, he shall not be called out unless,
in the umpire’s judgment, such hindrance, whether it occurs on
fair or foul territory, is intentional. If the umpire declares the
hindrance intentional, the following penalty shall apply: With
less than two out, the umpire shall declare both the runner and
batter out. With two out, the umpire shall declare the batter out.
If, in a run-down between third base and home plate, the
succeeding runner has advanced and is standing on third base
when the runner in a run-down is called out for offensive
interference, the umpire shall send the runner standing on third
base back to second base.
This same principle applies if there is a run-down between second
and third base and succeeding runner has reached second (the
reasoning is that no runner shall advance on an interference play
and a runner is considered to occupy a base until he legally has
reached the next succeeding base).
(b) Fielder Right of Way
The players, coaches or any member of a team at bat shall vacate
any space (including both dugouts or bullpens) needed by a fielder
who is attempting to field a batted or thrown ball. If a member of

RULE: 6.01(c)
COMMENT:
Defensive interference is an act by a
fielder that hinders or prevents a batter from hitting a pitch.
(c) Catcher Interference
The batter becomes a runner and is entitled to first base without
liability to be put out (provided he advances to and touches first
base) when the catcher or any fielder interferes with him. If a play
follows the interference, the manager of the offense may advise
the plate umpire that he elects to decline the interference penalty
and accept the play. Such election shall be made immediately at
the end of the play. However, if the batter reaches first base on a
hit, an error, a base on balls, a hit batsman, or otherwise, and all
other runners advance at least one base, the play proceeds without

RULE: 6.01(c)
COMMENT:
If catcher’s interference is called with
a play in progress the umpire will allow the play to continue
because the manager may elect to take the play. If the batter-
runner missed first base, or a runner misses his next base, he
shall be considered as having reached the base, as stated in

RULE: 5.06(b)(3)(D)
COMMENT:
For interference with a fielder
attempting to field a batted or thrown ball by members of the
team at bat or base coaches, who are excepted in Rule 6.01(d),

RULE: 5.06(c)(2)
COMMENT:
There is a difference between a ball
which has been thrown or batted into the stands, touching a
spectator thereby being out of play even though it rebounds
onto the field and a spectator going onto the field or reaching
over, under or through a barrier and touching a ball in play or
touching or otherwise interfering with a player. In the latter case
it is clearly intentional and shall be dealt with as intentional

RULE: 6.01(d)
COMMENT:
Umpire’s interference occurs (1) when
a plate umpire hinders, impedes or prevents a catcher’s throw
attempting to prevent a stolen base or retire a runner on a pick-off
play; or (2) when a fair ball touches an umpire on fair territory
before passing a fielder. Umpire interference may also occur when
an umpire interferes with a catcher returning the ball to the pitcher.
(g) Interference With Squeeze Play or Steal of Home
If, with a runner on third base and trying to score by means of a
squeeze play or a steal, the catcher or any other fielder steps on, or
in front of home base without possession of the ball, or touches the
batter or his bat, the pitcher shall be charged with a balk, the batter
shall be awarded first base on the interference and the ball is dead.
(h) Obstruction
When obstruction occurs, the umpire shall call or signal
“Obstruction.”
(1) If a play is being made on the obstructed runner, or if the
batter-runner is obstructed before he touches first base, the
ball is dead and all runners shall advance, without liability
to be put out, to the bases they would have reached, in
the umpire’s judgment, if there had been no obstruction.
The obstructed runner shall be awarded at least one base
beyond the base he had last legally touched before the

RULE: 6.01(h)(2)
COMMENT:
When a play is being made on an
obstructed runner, the umpire shall signal obstruction in the
same manner that he calls “Time,” with both hands overhead.
The ball is immediately dead when this signal is given; however,
should a thrown ball be in flight before the obstruction is called
by the umpire, the runners are to be awarded such bases on wild
throws as they would have been awarded had not obstruction
occurred. On a play where a runner was trapped between
second and third and obstructed by the third baseman going
into third base while the throw is in flight from the shortstop, if
such throw goes into the dugout the obstructed runner is to be
awarded home base. Any other runners on base in this situation
would also be awarded two bases from the base they last legally
touched before obstruction was called.
(2) If no play is being made on the obstructed runner, the
play shall proceed until no further action is possible. The
umpire shall then call “Time” and impose such penalties,
if any, as in his judgment will nullify the act of obstruction.

RULE: 6.01(h)(2)
COMMENT:
If a fielder is about to receive a thrown
ball and if the ball is in flight directly toward and near enough to
the fielder so he must occupy his position to receive the ball he
may be considered “in the act of fielding a ball.” It is entirely up

RULE: 6.01(i)(2)
COMMENT:
The failure by the runner to make an
effort to touch the plate, the runner’s lowering of the shoulder,
or the runner’s pushing through with his hands, elbows or
arms, would support a determination that the runner deviated
from the pathway in order to initiate contact with the catcher in

RULE: 6.01(i)
COMMENT:
A catcher shall not be deemed

RULE: 6.01(i)(2)
COMMENT:
If a left-handed or right-handed
pitcher swings his free foot past the back edge of the pitcher’s
rubber, he is required to pitch to the batter except to throw to
second base on a pick-off play.

RULE: 6.02(a)(6)
COMMENT:
Requires the pitcher, while touching
his plate, to step directly toward a base before throwing to
that base. If a pitcher turns or spins off of his free foot without
actually stepping or if he turns his body and throws before
stepping, it is a balk.
A pitcher is to step directly toward a base before throwing
to that base and is required to throw (except to second base)
because he steps. It is a balk if, with runners on first and third,
the pitcher steps toward third and does not throw, merely to
bluff the runner back to third; then seeing the runner on first
start for second, turn and step toward and throw to first base. It
is legal for a pitcher to feint a throw to second base.
(4) The pitcher, while touching his plate, throws, or feints a
throw to an unoccupied base, except for the purpose of

RULE: 6.02(a)(4)
COMMENT:
When determining whether the
pitcher throws or feints a throw to an unoccupied base for
the purpose of making a play, the umpire should consider
whether a runner on the previous base demonstrates or
otherwise creates an impression of his intent to advance to
such unoccupied base.
(5) The pitcher makes an illegal pitch;

RULE: 6.02(a)(5)
COMMENT:
A quick pitch is an illegal pitch.
Umpires will judge a quick pitch as one delivered before the
batter is reasonably set in the batter’s box. With runners on base
the penalty is a balk; with no runners on base, it is a ball. The
quick pitch is dangerous and should not be permitted.
(6) The pitcher delivers the ball to the batter while he is not
facing the batter;

RULE: 6.02(a)(13)
COMMENT:
Rule 6.02(a)(8) shall not apply when

RULE: 6.02(c)(8)
COMMENT:
Umpires should bear in mind that
the purpose of the balk rule is to prevent the pitcher from
deliberately deceiving the base runner. If there is doubt in
the umpire’s mind, the “intent” of the pitcher should govern.
However, certain specifics should be borne in mind:
(A) Straddling the pitcher’s rubber without the ball is to be
interpreted as intent to deceive and ruled a balk.
(B) With a runner on first base the pitcher may make a
complete turn, without hesitating toward first, and
throw to second. This is not to be interpreted as
throwing to an unoccupied base.
(b) Illegal Pitches With Bases Unoccupied
If the pitcher makes an illegal pitch with the bases unoccupied, it
shall be called a ball unless the batter reaches first base on a hit, an
error, a base on balls, a hit batter or otherwise.

RULE: 6.02(b)
COMMENT:
A ball which slips out of a pitcher’s
hand and crosses the foul line shall be called a ball; otherwise it
will be called no pitch. This would be a balk with men on base.
(c) Pitching Prohibitions
The pitcher shall not:
(1) While in the 18-foot circle surrounding the pitcher’s plate,
touch the ball after touching his mouth or lips, or touch his
mouth or lips while he is in contact with the pitcher’s plate.
The pitcher must clearly wipe the fingers of his pitching
hand dry before touching the ball or the pitcher’s plate.
EXCEPTION: Provided it is agreed to by both managers, the
umpire prior to the start of a game played in cold weather,
may permit the pitcher to blow on his hand.
PENALTY: For violation of this part of this rule the umpires
shall immediately remove the ball from play and issue a warning
to the pitcher. Any subsequent violation shall be called a ball.
However, if the pitch is made and a batter reaches first base on
a hit, an error, a hit batsman or otherwise, and no other runner
is put out before advancing at least one base, the play shall

RULE: 6.02(c)(9)
COMMENT:
The pitcher may not attach anything
to either hand, any finger or either wrist (e.g., Band-Aid, tape,
Super Glue, bracelet, etc.). The umpire shall determine if such
attachment is indeed a foreign substance for the purpose of

RULE: 6.02(c)(7)
COMMENT:
Team personnel may not come onto
the playing surface to argue or dispute a warning issued under

RULE: 6.02(c)(9)
COMMENT:
If a pitcher

RULE: 6.02(c)(3)
COMMENT:
If at any time the ball hits the rosin bag it
is in play. In the case of rain or wet field, the umpire may instruct
the pitcher to carry the rosin bag in his hip pocket. A pitcher may
use the rosin bag for the purpose of applying rosin to his bare
hand or hands. Neither the pitcher nor any other player shall dust
the ball with the rosin bag; neither shall the pitcher nor any other
player be permitted to apply rosin from the bag to his glove or
dust any part of his uniform with the rosin bag.

RULE: 6.03
COMMENT:
If a batter hits a ball fair or foul
while out of the batter’s box, he shall be called out. Umpires
should pay particular attention to the position of the batter’s
feet if he attempts to hit the ball while he is being intentionally
passed. A batter cannot jump or step out of the batter’s box and
hit the ball.
(2) He steps from one batter’s box to the other while the
pitcher is in position ready to pitch;
(3) He interferes with the catcher’s fielding or throwing by
stepping out of the batter’s box or making any other
movement that hinders the catcher’s play at home base.
(4) He throws his bat into fair or foul territory and hits a
catcher (including the catcher’s glove) and the catcher

RULE: 6.03(a)(5)
COMMENT:
If the batter interferes with
the catcher, the plate umpire shall call “interference.” The
batter is out and the ball dead. No player may advance on such
interference (offensive interference) and all runners must return
to the last base that was, in the judgment of the umpire, legally
touched at the time of the interference.
If, however, the catcher makes a play and the runner attempting
to advance is put out, it is to be assumed there was no actual
interference and that runner is out—not the batter. Any other
runners on the base at the time may advance as the ruling is that
there is no actual interference if a runner is retired. In that case
play proceeds just as if no violation had been called.
If a batter strikes at a ball and misses and swings so hard he
carries the bat all the way around and, in the umpire’s judgment,
unintentionally hits the catcher or the ball in back of him on the
backswing, it shall be called a strike only (not interference).
The ball will be dead, however, and no runner shall advance
on the play.
(5) He uses or attempts to use a bat that, in the umpire’s
judgment, has been altered or tampered with in such a
way to improve the distance factor or cause an unusual
reaction on the baseball. This includes bats that are filled,
flat-surfaced, nailed, hollowed, grooved or covered with a
substance such as paraffin, wax, etc.
(1) No advancement on the bases will be allowed (except
advancements that are not caused by the use of an illegal
bat, e,g., stolen base, balk, wild pitch, passed ball), and any
out or outs made during a play shall stand. In addition to
being called out, the player shall be ejected from the game
and may be subject to additional penalties as determined
by the Office of the Commissioner.

RULE: 6.03(b)(7)
COMMENT:
A batter shall be deemed to have
used or attempted to use an illegal bat if he brings such a bat
into the batter’s box.
(b) Batting Out of Turn
(1) A batter shall be called out, on appeal, when he fails to bat
in his proper turn, and another batter completes a time at
bat in his place.
(2) The proper batter may take his place in the batter’s box at
any time before the improper batter becomes a runner or
is put out, and any balls and strikes shall be counted in the
proper batter’s time at bat.
(3) When an improper batter becomes a runner or is put out,
and the defensive team appeals to the umpire before the
first pitch to the next batter of either team, or before any
play or attempted play, the umpire shall (1) declare the
proper batter out; and (2) nullify any advance or score
made because of a ball batted by the improper batter or
because of the improper batter’s advance to first base on a
hit, an error, a base on balls, a hit batter or otherwise.
(4) If a runner advances, while the improper batter is at bat,
on a stolen base, balk, wild pitch or passed ball, such
advance is legal.
(5) W hen an improper batter becomes a runner or is put out,
and a pitch is made to the next batter of either team before
an appeal is made, the improper batter thereby becomes the
proper batter, and the results of his time at bat become legal.
(6) When the proper batter is called out because he has failed
to bat in turn, the next batter shall be the batter whose
name follows that of the proper batter thus called out.
(7) When an improper batter becomes a proper batter because
no appeal is made before the next pitch, the next batter
shall be the batter whose name follows that of such
legalized improper batter. The instant an improper batter’s
actions are legalized, the batting order picks up with the
name following that of the legalized improper batter.
86

RULE: 6.03(b)(7)
COMMENT:
The umpire shall not direct the
attention of any person to the presence in the batter’s box of
an improper batter. This rule is designed to require constant
vigilance by the players and managers of both teams.
There are two fundamentals to keep in mind: When a player
bats out of turn, the proper batter is the player called out.
If an improper batter bats and reaches base or is out and no
appeal is made before a pitch to the next batter, or before any
play or attempted play, that improper batter is considered to
have batted in proper turn and establishes the order that is to
follow.
APPROVED RULING: To illustrate various situations arising
from batting out of turn, assume a first-inning batting order as
follows:
Abel-Baker-Charles-Daniel-Edward-Frank-George-Hooker-
Irwin.
PLAY (1) — Baker bats. With the count 2 balls and 1 strike,
(a) the offensive team discovers the error or (b) the defensive
team appeals. Ruling—In either case, Abel replaces Baker,
with the count on him 2 balls and 1 strike.
PLAY (2)—Baker bats and doubles. The defensive team
appeals (a) immediately or (b) after a pitch to Charles.
RULING: (a) Abel is called out and Baker is the proper
batter; (b) Baker stays on second and Charles is the proper
batter.
PLAY (3)—Abel walks. Baker walks. Charles forces
Baker. Edward bats in Daniel’s turn. While Edward is at
bat, Abel scores and Charles goes to second on a wild
pitch. Edward grounds out, sending Charles to third. The
defensive team appeals (a) immediately or (b) after a
pitch to Daniel.
RULING: (a) Abel’s run counts and Charles is entitled to
second base since these advances were not made because of
the improper batter batting a ball or advancing to first base.
Charles must return to second base because his advance
to third resulted from the improper batter batting a ball.
Daniel is called out, and Edward is the proper batter; (b)
87

RULE: 6.04(d)
COMMENT:
If a manager, coach or player is under
suspension he may be in uniform and may participate in the
regular pre-game routines of the Club. At game time, however,

RULE: 6.04(e)
COMMENT:
If immediately prior to the call of a
suspended game, a pitcher has not pitched to a minimum of
three consecutive batters in accordance with Rule 5.10(g),
such pitcher, when the suspended game is later resumed may,
but is not required to start the resumed portion of the game.
However, if he does start the resumed portion of the game, he
shall have to complete pitching to his first three consecutive

RULE: 5.10(g)
COMMENT:
Players leaving their position in the
field or on base, or managers or coaches leaving the bench or

RULE: 8.02(c)
COMMENT:
A manager is permitted to ask the
umpires for an explanation of the play and how the umpires
have exercised their discretion to eliminate the results and
consequences of the earlier call that the umpires are reversing.
Once the umpires explain the result of the play, however, no
one is permitted to argue that the umpires should have exercised
their discretion in a different manner.

RULE: 8.02(e)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall forward the
official score report to the league statistician instead of to
the league office, if requested to do so by the league. In the
event of any discrepancy in records maintained by a league
statistician and the rulings by an Official Scorer, the report
of such Official Scorer shall control. League statisticians and
Official Scorers should consult cooperatively to resolve any
discrepancies.
(b) (1) I n all cases, the Official Scorer shall not make a scoring
decision that is in conflict with Rule 9 or any other Official
Baseball Rule. The Official Scorer shall conform strictly
to the rules of scoring set forth in this Rule 9. The Official
Scorer shall not make any decision that conflicts with an
umpire’s decision. The Official Scorer shall have authority
to rule on any point not specifically covered in these rules.
The Office of the Commissioner, with respect to Major
League and Minor League scorers shall order changed
any decision of an Official Scorer that contradicts the rules
of scoring set forth in this Rule 9 and shall take whatever
remedial actions as may be necessary to correct any
statistics that need correction as a result of such mistaken
scoring decision.
(2) If the teams change sides before three men are put out, the
Official Scorer shall immediately inform the umpire-in-
chief of the mistake.

RULE: 9.01(b)
COMMENT:
It is important that a suspended
game resume with exactly the same situation as existed at the
time of suspension.
(4) The Official Scorer shall not call the attention of any
umpire or of any member of either team to the fact that a
player is batting out of turn.
(c) The Official Scorer for Major League and Minor League games
is an official representative who is entitled to the respect and
dignity of his office and shall be accorded full protection by
the Office of the Commissioner. The Official Scorer shall report
to the appropriate league official any indignity expressed by
any manager, player, Club employee, Club officer, or media
personnel in the course of, or as the result of, the discharge of

RULE: 9.02
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer should not
charge a batter with grounding into a double play if the batter-
runner is called out due to interference by a preceding runner.
(18) Number of times caught stealing.
(b) The following records for each fielder:
(1) Number of putouts;
(2) Number of assists;
(3) Number of errors;
(4) Number of double plays participated in; and
(5) Number of triple plays participated in.
(c) The following records for each pitcher:
(1) Number of innings pitched;

RULE: 9.02(d)
COMMENT:
In computing innings pitched, the
Official Scorer shall count each putout as ⅓ of an inning. For
example, if a starting pitcher is replaced with one out in the
sixth inning, the Official Scorer shall credit that pitcher with
5⅓ innings. If a starting pitcher is replaced with none out in
the sixth inning, the Official Scorer shall credit that pitcher
with 5 innings and make the notation that that pitcher faced
_____ batters in the sixth, noting the number of batters faced.
If a relief pitcher retires two batters and is replaced, the Official
Scorer shall credit that pitcher with ⅔ of an inning pitched. If a
relief pitcher enters a game and his team initiates a successful
appeal play that results in one out, the officer scorer shall credit
such relief pitcher with ⅓ of an inning pitched.
(2) Total number of batters faced;
(3) Number of batters officially at bat against pitcher,

RULE: 9.02(a)(1)
COMMENT:
For example, an Official Scorer would
note: “Double Plays—Jones, Roberts and Smith (2). Triple
Play—Jones and Smith.”
(g) Number of runners left on base by each team. This total shall
include all runners who get on base by any means and who do
not score and are not put out. The Official Scorer shall include
in this total a batter-runner whose batted ball results in another
runner being retired for the third out.
(h) Names of batters who hit home runs with the bases full.
(i) Number of outs when winning run scored, if the game was won
in the last half-inning.
(j) The score by innings for each team.
(k) Names of umpires, listed in this order: plate umpire, first-
base umpire, second-base umpire, third-base umpire, left-field
umpire (if any) and right-field umpire (if any).
(l) Time required to play the game, with delays deducted for
weather, light failure or technological failure not related to

RULE: 9.02(l)
COMMENT:
A delay to attend to the injury of a player,
manager, coach or umpire shall be counted in computing time
of game.
(m) Official attendance, as provided by the home Club.

RULE: 9.03
COMMENT:
When a player does not exchange
positions with another fielder but is merely placed in a different
spot for a particular batter (for example, if a second baseman goes
to the outfield to form a four-man outfield, or if a third baseman
moves to a position between the shortstop and second baseman),
the Official Scorer should not list this as a new position.
(b) The Official Scorer shall identify in the official score report any
player who enters the game as a substitute batter or substitute
runner, whether or not such player continues in the game
thereafter, in the batting order by a special symbol that shall refer
to a separate record of substitute batters and runners. The record
of substitute batters shall describe what the substitute batter did.
The record of substitute batters and runners shall include the
name of any such substitute whose name is announced, but
who is removed for another substitute before he actually gets
into the game. Any such second substitute shall be recorded as
batting or running for the first announced substitute.

RULE: 9.03(b)
COMMENT:
Lower case letters are recommended
as symbols for substitute batters and numerals are
recommended as symbols for substitute runners. For example,
an official score report may note as follows: “a-Singled for
Abel in third inning; b-Flied out for Baker in sixth inning;
c-Hit into force for Charles in seventh inning; d-Grounded
out for Daniel in ninth inning; 1-Ran for Edward in ninth
inning.” If a substitute’s name is announced but the substitute
is removed for another substitute before he actually gets into
the game, the Official Scorer report shall record the substitute,
for example, as follows: “e-Announced as substitute for Frank
in seventh inning.”
(c) How to Prove a Box Score
A box score shall balance (or is proven) when the total of the
team’s times at bat, bases on balls received, hit batters, sacrifice
bunts, sacrifice flies and batters awarded first base because of
interference, obstruction, or shift restriction violation equals the
total of that team’s runs, players left on base and the opposing
team’s putouts.

RULE: 9.03(e)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall not consider
that, by rule, the score of a forfeited game is 9 to 0 (see Definition
of Terms (Forfeited Game)), notwithstanding the results on the
field at the point the game is forfeited.

RULE: 9.05(a)(1)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall credit a hit
if the fielder attempting to handle the ball cannot make a play,
even if such fielder deflects the ball from or cuts off another
fielder who could have put out a runner.
(3) the batter reaches first base safely on a fair ball that takes
an unnatural bounce so that a fielder cannot handle it with
ordinary effort, or that touches the pitcher’s plate or any
base (including home plate) before being touched by a
fielder and bounces so that a fielder cannot handle the ball
with ordinary effort;
(4) the batter reaches first base safely on a fair ball that has
not been touched by a fielder and that is in fair territory
when the ball reaches the outfield, unless in the scorer’s
judgment the ball could have been handled with ordinary
effort;
(5) a fair ball that has not been touched by a fielder touches
a runner or an umpire, unless a runner is called out for
having been touched by an Infield Fly, in which case the
Official Scorer shall not score a hit; or
(6) a fielder unsuccessfully attempts to put out a preceding
runner and, in the Official Scorer’s judgment, the batter-
runner would not have been put out at first base by

RULE: 9.05(a)
COMMENT:
In applying Rule 9.05(a), the Official
Scorer shall always give the batter the benefit of the doubt. A
safe course for the Official Scorer to follow is to score a hit when
exceptionally good fielding of a ball fails to result in a putout.
(b) The Official Scorer shall not credit a base hit when a:

RULE: 9.05(b)
COMMENT:
Rule 9.05(b) shall not apply if the
fielder merely looks toward or feints toward another base
before attempting to make the putout at first base.
(5) is called out for interference with a fielder attempting
to field a batted ball, unless in the scorer’s judgment the
batter-runner would have been safe had the interference

RULE: 9.06
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall not credit the
batter with a three-base hit when a preceding runner is put out
at home plate, or would have been out but for an error. The
Official Scorer shall not credit the batter with a two-base hit
when a preceding runner trying to advance from first base is
put out at third base, or would have been out but for an error.
The Official Scorer shall not, however, with the exception of
the above, determine the value of base-hits by the number of
bases advanced by a preceding runner. A batter may deserve a
two-base hit even though a preceding runner advances one or
no bases; a batter may deserve only a one-base hit even though
he reaches second base and a preceding runner advances two
bases. For example:
(1) Runner on first. Batter hits to right fielder, who throws
to third base in an unsuccessful attempt to put out
runner. Batter takes second base. The Official Scorer
shall credit batter with one-base hit.
(2) R unner on second. Batter hits fair fly ball. Runner holds
up to determine if ball is caught and then advances
only to third base, while batter takes second base. The
Official Scorer shall credit batter with two-base hit.
(3) Runner on third. Batter hits high, fair fly. Runner takes
a lead, then runs back to tag up, thinking the ball will
be caught. The ball falls safe, but runner cannot score,
although batter has reached second. The Official
Scorer shall credit batter with a two-base hit.
(c) W hen the batter attempts to make a two-base hit or a three-base
hit by sliding, he must hold the last base to which he advances.
If a batter-runner overslides and is tagged out before getting back
to the base safely, he shall credit with only as many bases as he
attained safely. If a batter-runner overslides second base and is
tagged out, the Official Scorer shall credit him with a one-base

RULE: 9.06(f)
COMMENT:
If the batter-runner overruns second or
third base and is tagged out trying to return, the Official Scorer
shall credit the batter-runner with the last base he touched. If
a batter-runner runs past second base after reaching that base
on his feet, attempts to return and is tagged out, the Official
Scorer shall credit the batter with a two-base hit. If a batter-
runner runs past third base after reaching that base on his feet,
attempts to return and is tagged out, the Official Scorer shall
credit the batter with a three-base hit.
(d) When the batter, after making a safe hit, is called out for having
failed to touch a base, the last base the batter reached safely
shall determine if the Official Scorer shall credit him with a
one-base hit, a two-base hit or a three-base hit. If a batter-
runner is called out after missing home plate, the Official
Scorer shall credit him with a three-base hit. If a batter-runner
is called out for missing third base, the Official Scorer shall
credit him with a two-base hit. If a batter-runner is called out
for missing second base, the Official Scorer shall credit him
with a one-base hit. If a batter-runner is called out for missing
first base, the Official Scorer shall charge him with a time at
bat, but no hit.
(e) When a batter-runner is awarded two bases, three bases or a

RULE: 5.06(b)(4)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall apply this rule
even when the batter is theoretically entitled to more bases

RULE: 9.07(b)
COMMENT:
The scorer shall consider, in judging
whether the defensive team has been indifferent to a runner’s
advance, the totality of the circumstances, including the inning
and score of the game, whether the defensive team had held the
runner on base, whether the pitcher had made any pickoff attempts
on that runner before the runner’s advance, whether the fielder
ordinarily expected to cover the base to which the runner advanced
made a move to cover such base, whether the defensive team had
a legitimate strategic motive to not contest the runner’s advance

RULE: 9.08(a)
COMMENT:
In those instances where a pitched ball
eludes the catcher and the runner is put out trying to advance,
the Official Scorer shall not charge any “caught stealing.” The
Official Scorer shall not charge any caught stealing when a
runner is awarded a base due to obstruction or when a runner is
called out due to interference by the batter. The Official Scorer
shall not charge a runner with a caught stealing if such runner
would not have been credited with a stolen base had such runner
been safe (for example, when a catcher throws the runner out
after such runner tries to advance after a ball that had eluded the

RULE: 9.08
COMMENT:
In determining whether the batter had
been sacrificing his own chance of reaching first base for the
purpose of advancing a runner, the Official Scorer shall give the
batter the benefit of the doubt. The Official Scorer shall consider
the totality of the circumstances of the at-bat, including the
inning, the number of outs and the score.
(b) Score a sacrifice bunt when, before two are out, the fielders
handle a bunted ball without error in an unsuccessful attempt
to put out a preceding runner advancing one base, unless, an
attempt to turn a bunt into a putout of a preceding runner fails,
and in the judgment of the Official Scorer ordinary effort would
not have put out the batter at first base, in which case the batter
shall be credited with a one-base hit and not a sacrifice;
(c) Not score a sacrifice bunt when any runner is put out attempting
to advance one base on a bunt, or would have been put out,
except for a fielding error, in which case the Official Scorer
shall charge the batter with a time at bat; and
(d) Score a sacrifice fly when, before two are out, the batter hits a
ball in flight handled by an outfielder or an infielder running in
the outfield in fair or foul territory that
(1) is caught, and a runner scores after the catch, or
(2) is dropped, and a runner scores, if in the scorer’s judgment
the runner could have scored after the catch had the fly

RULE: 9.08(d)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall score a

RULE: 9.08(d)(2)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall credit a
fielder with a putout if such fielder catches a thrown ball and
tags a base to record an out on an appeal play.
(3) tags a runner when the runner is off the base to which the
runner is entitled.
(b) The Official Scorer shall credit an automatic putout to the
catcher when a:
(1) batter is called out on strikes;
(2) batter is called out for an illegally batted ball;
(3) batter is called out for bunting foul for his third strike;

RULE: 9.09(b)(3)
COMMENT:
Note the exception in Rule

RULE: 9.15(a)(4)
COMMENT:
See Rule 9.03(d).
(7) batter is called out for refusing to touch first base after
receiving a base on balls, after being hit by a pitch or after
a catcher’s interference; or
(8) runner is called out for refusing to advance from third base
to home plate.

RULE: 9.09(c)
COMMENT:
Mere ineffective contact with the ball
shall not be considered an assist. “Deflect” shall mean to slow
down or change the direction of the ball and thereby effectively
assist in putting out a batter or runner. If a putout results from an
appeal play within the natural course of play, the Official Scorer
shall give assists to each fielder, except the fielder making the
putout, whose action led to the putout. If a putout results from
an appeal play initiated by the pitcher throwing to a fielder after
the previous play has ended, the Official Scorer shall credit the
pitcher, and only the pitcher, with an assist.
(2) throws or deflects the ball during a play that results in a
runner being called out for interference or for running out
of line.
(b) The Official Scorer shall not credit an assist to
(1) the pitcher on a strikeout, unless the pitcher fields an
uncaught third strike and makes a throw that results in a
putout;
(2) the pitcher when, as the result of a legal pitch received by
the catcher, a runner is put out, as when the catcher picks a
runner off base, throws out a runner trying to steal or tags
a runner trying to score; or
(3) a fielder whose wild throw permits a runner to advance,
even though the runner subsequently is put out as a result

RULE: 9.10(b)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall credit a double
play or triple play also if an appeal play after the ball is in
possession of the pitcher results in an additional putout.

RULE: 9.12
COMMENT:
Slow handling of the ball that does
not involve mechanical misplay shall not be construed as an
error. For example, the Official Scorer shall not charge a fielder
with an error if such fielder fields a ground ball cleanly but
does not throw to first base in time to retire the batter. It is not
necessary that the fielder touch the ball to be charged with an
error. If a ground ball goes through a fielder’s legs or a fly ball
falls untouched and, in the scorer’s judgment, the fielder could
have handled the ball with ordinary effort, the Official Scorer

RULE: 9.12(a)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall apply this
rule even when it appears to be an injustice to a fielder whose
throw was accurate. For example, the Official Scorer shall
charge an error to an outfielder whose accurate throw to second
base hits the base and caroms back into the outfield, thereby
permitting a runner or runners to advance, because every base
advanced by a runner must be accounted for.
(8) whose failure to stop, or try to stop, an accurately
thrown ball permits a runner to advance, so long as
there was occasion for the throw. If such throw was
made to second base, the Official Scorer shall determine
whether it was the duty of the second baseman or the
shortstop to stop the ball and shall charge an error to

RULE: 9.12(a)(8)
COMMENT:
If, in the Official Scorer’s judgment,
there was no occasion for the throw, the Official Scorer shall
charge an error to the fielder who threw the ball.
(b) The Official Scorer shall charge only one error on any wild
throw, regardless of the number of bases advanced by one or
more runners.

RULE: 9.12(e)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall not charge an
error if obstruction does not change the play, in the opinion of
the scorer.
(d) The Official Scorer shall not charge an error against:
(1) t he catcher when the catcher, after receiving the pitch, makes
a wild throw attempting to prevent a stolen base, unless the
wild throw permits the stealing runner to advance one or
more extra bases or permits any other runner to advance
one or more bases;
(2) any fielder who makes a wild throw if in the scorer’s
judgment the runner would not have been put out with
ordinary effort by a good throw, unless such wild throw
permits any runner to advance beyond the base he would
have reached had the throw not been wild;
(3) any fielder who makes a wild throw in attempting to
complete a double play or triple play, unless such wild
throw enables any runner to advance beyond the base such
runner would have reached had the throw not been wild;

RULE: 9.12(d)
COMMENT:
When a fielder muffs a thrown ball
that, if held, would have completed a double play or triple play,
the Official Scorer shall charge an error to the fielder who drops
the ball and credit an assist to the fielder who made the throw.
(4) any fielder when, after a ground ball or dropping a batted
ball that is in flight or a thrown ball, the fielder recovers
the ball in time to force out a runner at any base; or
(5) any fielder when a wild pitch or passed ball is scored.
(e) T he Official Scorer shall not charge an error when the batter is
awarded first base on four called balls, when the batter is awarded

RULE: 9.13(a)
COMMENT:
See Rule 9.13 for additional scoring
rules relating to wild pitches and passed balls.
(f) T he Official Scorer shall not charge an error when a runner or
runners advance as the result of a passed ball, a wild pitch or a
balk.
(1) When the fourth called ball is a wild pitch or a passed ball
and as a result
(A) the batter-runner advances to a base beyond first base;
(B) any runner forced to advance by the base on balls
advances more than one base; or
(C) any runner, not forced to advance, advances one or
more bases, the Official Scorer shall score the base on
balls and also the wild pitch or passed ball, as the case
may be.
(2) When the catcher recovers the ball after a wild pitch or
passed ball on the third strike, and throws out the batter-
runner at first base, or tags out the batter-runner, but
another runner or runners advance, the Official Scorer
shall score the strikeout, the putout and assists, if any, and
credit the advance of the other runner or runners on the

RULE: 9.12(f)
COMMENT:
See Rule 9.13 for additional scoring
rules relating to wild pitches and passed balls.

RULE: 9.13
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall not charge a wild
pitch or passed ball if the defensive team makes an out before
any runners advance. For example, if a pitch touches the ground
and eludes the catcher with a runner on first base, but the catcher
recovers the ball and throws to second base in time to retire the
runner, the Official Scorer shall not charge the pitcher with a wild
pitch. The Official Scorer shall credit the advancement of any
other runner on the play as a fielder’s choice. If a catcher drops
a pitch, for example, with a runner on first base, but the catcher
recovers the ball and throws to second base in time to retire the
runner, the Official Scorer shall not charge the catcher with a
passed ball. The Official Scorer shall credit the advancement of
any other runner on the play as a fielder’s choice.

RULE: 9.12(f)
COMMENT:
See Rule 9.16(h) for the procedure
when more than one pitcher is involved in giving a base on

RULE: 9.15
COMMENT:
The following are examples of earned
runs charged to a pitcher:
(1) P eter pitches and retires Abel and Baker, the first two
batters of an inning. Charlie reaches first base on an error
charged to a fielder. Daniel hits a home run. Edward hits
a home run. Peter retires Frank to end the inning. Three
runs have scored, but no earned runs are charged to Peter,
because Charlie should have been the third out of the
inning, as reconstructed without the error.
(2) P eter pitches and retires Abel. Baker hits a triple. While
pitching to Charlie, Peter throws a wild pitch, allowing
Baker to score. Peter retires Daniel and Edward. One
run has scored, charged as an earned run to Peter,
because the wild pitch contributes to an earned run.
I n an inning in which a batter-runner reaches first base
on a catcher’s interference, such batter-runner shall not
count as an earned run should he subsequently score.

RULE: 9.16(d)
COMMENT:
It is the intent of Rule 9.16(g) to charge
each pitcher with the number of runners he put on base, rather
than with the individual runners. When a pitcher puts runners on
base and is relieved, such pitcher shall be charged with all runs
subsequently scored up to and including the number of runners
such pitcher left on base when such pitcher left the game, unless
such runners are put out without action by the batter (i.e., caught
stealing, picked off base or called out for interference when a
batter-runner does not reach first base on the play). For example:
(1) P eter is pitching. Abel reaches first base on a base
on balls. Roger relieves Peter. Baker grounds out,
advancing Abel to second base. Charlie flies out. Daniel
singles, scoring Abel. Abel’s run is charged to Peter.
(2) Peter is pitching. Abel reaches first base on a base
on balls. Roger relieves Peter. Baker forces Abel at
second bases. Charlie grounds out, advancing Baker
to second base. Daniel singles, scoring Baker. Baker’s
run is charged to Peter.
(3) Peter is pitching. Abel reaches first base on a base on
balls. Roger relieves Peter. Baker singles, advancing
Abel to third base. Charlie grounds to short, with Abel
out at home plate and Baker advancing to second
base. Daniel flies out. Edward singles, scoring Baker.
Baker’s run is charged to Peter.

RULE: 9.16(h)
COMMENT:
The provisions of Rule 9.16(h)(2)
shall not be construed as affecting or conflicting with the

RULE: 9.16(g)
COMMENT:
It is the intent of Rule 9.16(i) to charge
a relief pitcher with earned runs for which such relief pitcher is
solely responsible. In some instances, runs charged as earned
against the relief pitcher can be charged as unearned against the
team. For example:
(1) With two out and Peter pitching, Abel reaches first
base on a base on balls. Baker reaches first base on
an error. Roger relieves Peter. Charlie hits a home
run, scoring three runs. The Official Scorer shall
charge two unearned runs to Peter, one earned run to

RULE: 9.17(a)
COMMENT:
Whenever the score is tied, the game
becomes a new contest insofar as the winning pitcher is concerned.
Once the opposing team assumes the lead, all pitchers who have
pitched up to that point and have been replaced are excluded
from being credited with the victory. If the pitcher against whose
pitching the opposing team gained the lead continues to pitch

RULE: 9.17(c)
COMMENT:
It is the intent of Rule 9.17(b) that a
relief pitcher pitch at least one complete inning or pitch when a
crucial out is made, within the context of the game (including
the score), in order to be credited as the winning pitcher. If the
first relief pitcher pitches effectively, the Official Scorer should
not presumptively credit that pitcher with the win, because
the rule requires that the win be credited to the pitcher who
was the most effective, and a subsequent relief pitcher may
have been most effective. The Official Scorer, in determining
which relief pitcher was the most effective, should consider
the number of runs, earned runs and base runners given up by
each relief pitcher and the context of the game at the time of
each relief pitcher’s appearance. If two or more relief pitchers
were similarly effective, the Official Scorer should give the
presumption to the earlier pitcher as the winning pitcher.
(c) The Official Scorer shall not credit as the winning pitcher a
relief pitcher who is ineffective in a brief appearance, when at
least one succeeding relief pitcher pitches effectively in helping
his team maintain its lead. In such a case, the Official Scorer
shall credit as the winning pitcher the succeeding relief pitcher
who was most effective, in the judgment of the Official Scorer.

RULE: 9.17(c)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer generally should,
but is not required to, consider the appearance of a relief pitcher

RULE: 9.19
COMMENT:
Whenever the score is tied, the game
becomes a new contest insofar as the losing pitcher is concerned.
(e) A league may designate a non-championship game (for
example, the Major League All-Star Game) for which Rules

RULE: 9.17(b)
COMMENT:
The Official Scorer shall credit a player
with having played on defense if such player is on the field for at
least one pitch or play. If a game is called (for example, because
of rain) after a substitute player enters the field but before a

RULE: 9.21(f)
COMMENT:
For example, 91/3 innings pitched and
3 earned runs is an earned-run average of 2.89 (3 earned runs

RULE: 2.89
COMMENT:
For the purpose of computing on-base
percentage, ignore instances of a batter being awarded first base
on interference, obstruction, or shift restriction violation.

RULE: 9.22(a)
COMMENT:
For example, if a Major League
schedules 162 games for each Club, 502 plate appearances
qualify (162 times 3.1 equals 502) a player for a batting,
slugging or on-base percentage championship. If 140 games
are scheduled for each Club in a Minor League, 378 plate
appearances qualify (140 times 2.7 equals 378) a player for
a batting, slugging or on-base percentage championship.
Fractions of a plate appearance are to be rounded up or down
to the closest whole number. For example, 162 times 3.1 equals
502.2, which is rounded down to a requirement of 502.
If, for example, Abel has the highest batting average among
those with 502 plate appearance in a Major League with a .362
batting average (181 hits in 500 at-bats), and Baker has 490
plate appearances, 440 at-bats and 165 hits for a .375 batting
average, Baker shall be the batting champion, because adding
12 more at-bats to Baker’s record would still give Baker a

RULE: 9.22(c)
COMMENT:
For example, if a Major League
schedules 162 games for each Club, 162 innings qualify a pitcher
for a pitching championship. A pitcher with 1612 /3 innings
would not qualify. If 140 games are scheduled for each Club
in a Minor League, 112 innings qualify a pitcher for a pitching
championship. Fractions of an inning for the required number of
innings are to be rounded to the closest third of an inning. For
example, 80% of 144 games is 115.2, so 1151 ⁄3 innings would be
the minimum required for a pitching championship in a Minor
League with 144 games scheduled and 80% of 76 games is 60.8,
so 60 2 /3 innings would be the minimum required for a pitching
championship in a Minor League with 76 games scheduled.
(c) The individual fielding champions shall be the fielders with the
highest fielding average at each position, provided:
(1) A catcher must have participated as a catcher in at least
one-half the number of games scheduled for each Club in
his league that season;
(2) An infielder or outfielder must have participated at his
position in at least two-thirds of the number of games
scheduled for each Club in his league that season; and
(3) A pitcher must have pitched at least as many innings as the
number of games scheduled for each Club in his league
that season, unless another pitcher has a fielding average

RULE: 9.23
COMMENT:
A catch is legal if the ball is finally held
by any fielder, even though juggled, or held by another fielder
before it touches the ground. Runners may leave their bases the
instant the first fielder touches the ball. A fielder may reach over
a fence, railing, rope or other line of demarcation to make a
catch. He may jump on top of a railing, or canvas that may be in
foul ground. No interference should be allowed when a fielder
reaches over a fence, railing, rope or into a stand to catch a ball.
He does so at his own risk.
If a fielder, attempting a catch at the edge of the dugout, is “held
up” and kept from an apparent fall by a player or players of
either team and the catch is made, it shall be allowed.
The CATCHER is the fielder who takes his position back of the
home base.
The CATCHER’S BOX is that area within which the catcher shall
stand until the pitcher delivers the ball.
147

RULE: 5.09(a)(12)
COMMENT:
This standard, called for several
times in the Official Scoring Rules (e.g., Rules 9.05(a)(3), 9.05(a)

RULE: 9.05(b)(3)
COMMENT:
All other deliveries of the ball by one player
to another are thrown balls.
A PITCHER is the fielder designated to deliver the pitch to the
batter.
The pitcher’s PIVOT FOOT is that foot which is in contact with the
pitcher’s plate as he delivers the pitch.
“PLAY” is the umpire’s order to start the game or to resume action
following any dead ball.
154

RULE: 7.01
COMMENT:
Equipment shall be considered worn by a
player or umpire if it is in contact with its intended place on
his person.
A TRIPLE PLAY is a play by the defense in which three offensive
players are put out as a result of continuous action, providing there is no
error between putouts.
156

RULE: 1.00
COMMENT:
Apparent Fourth Out—5.09(c)(4).

RULE: 5.06(c)(3)
COMMENT:
“Backswing” (Follow-Through) Interference—6.03(a)(3) Comment.

RULE: 6.01(g)
COMMENT:
Base Coaches—5.03;

RULE: 6.01(a)
COMMENT:
Interference with 5.05(b)(3), 5.06(b)(3)(D);
Interferes with catcher after dropped third strike 6.01(a)(1),

RULE: 6.01(a)(1)
COMMENT:
Coach—Definitions of Terms, 4.02(b), 5.03, 6.01(a)(8-9), 6.01(b),

RULE: 6.01(f)
COMMENT:
Dislodged Base—5.09(b)(4) Approved Rulings A and B.

RULE: 7.02(a)(1)
COMMENT:
167

RULE: 5.10(b)
COMMENT:
Dropped Third Strike—Definitions of Terms (“Ball”), 5.05(a)(2),

RULE: 5.09(a)
COMMENT:
Force Play/Force Out—Definitions of Terms, 5.09(b)(6);

RULE: 4.08(g)
COMMENT:
Fraternization—4.06.

RULE: 5.09(b)
COMMENT:
Hidden Ball Trick—6.02(a)(9).

RULE: 5.06(b)(4)(A)
COMMENT:
Illegal Pitch—Definitions of Terms (Illegal Pitch and Quick Return),

RULE: 6.02(b)
COMMENT:
Missed Base or Home Plate—5.06(b)(4)(I) Comment, 5.09(b)(12),

RULE: 5.09(c)
COMMENT:
Official Scorer—5.10(d), 8.03(a)(8);

RULE: 9.01(c)
COMMENT:
Pinch-Hitter/Runner—see Substitutions.
Pitch—
Ball Definitions of Terms;

RULE: 5.07(c)
COMMENT:
Pitcher’s Plate—2.01, 2.04.

RULE: 5.10
COMMENT:
Playing Field—2.01.

RULE: 4.07(b)
COMMENT:
Regulation Game—1.06, 7.01, 7.01(g), 7.02;

RULE: 7.01(a)
COMMENT:
Runner—

RULE: 5.05(a)(2)
COMMENT:
Entitled to base 5.06(a)(1-2), 6.01(a) Comment;

RULE: 5.09(c)(1)
COMMENT:
see also Batter-Runner.

RULE: 7.01(g)
COMMENT:
Spectators—4.05, 4.07, 5.06(b)(3)(C), 5.12(b)(6), 6.04(a)(1-2), 6.04(b),

RULE: 8.01(e)
COMMENT:
Suspended Game—7.01(d), 7.02;

RULE: 7.02(b)
COMMENT:
Three-Batter Minimum—5.10(g), 5.10(g) Comment, 5.10(i) Note,

RULE: 7.02(c)
COMMENT:
Tie Game—Definitions of Terms, 7.01(d), 7.02.

RULE: 8.03(a)(7)
COMMENT:
Fielders other than pitchers 5.10(d) Comment;

RULE: 5.10(l)
COMMENT:
Weather and Playing Conditions—4.03(e), 4.03 Comment, 4.04,